# The Social Topography of the Swabian Children: A GIS-based Investigation of Adolescent Labor Migration from Vorarlberg and Tyrol to Upper Swabia 1812-1938

## Project Objective
The illustrated magazine 'Die Gartenlaube' reported in an issue from 1866 about a peculiar incident that occurred in a tavern somewhere between Lindau and Bregenz: "There sat a group of red-cheeked boys and girls of all ages, from seven to fifteen years old, each quietly absorbed in themselves [...]"[^fn1] The children were subsequently taken to the Ravensburg child labor market, where they were assessed for their performance under the critical eyes of Swabian farmers and taken into their service. "It is indeed a form of slave trade, no matter how one tries to look at this ugly matter with a milder eye."[^fn1] Scenes like those from the year 1866 were everyday occurrences in the central Alpine region a century ago: every March, children between the ages of seven and fifteen left their homes in Austria, Liechtenstein, and Switzerland to work in agriculture in southern Germany.

Exactly this phenomenon, which has been documented in writing since the 17th century, was the subject of my bachelor's thesis at the University of Heidelberg in late 2023. The centerpiece of the thesis was the first complete evaluation of the Swabian Children Database, which was created between 2008 and 2012 through the collaboration of museums and city archives from five countries as part of the EU Interreg IV project[^fn2]. This database contains 7,040 Swabian journeys of a total of 5,425 children spanning from 1697 to 1938, with those between the years 1860 and 1920 accounting for over 85% of the records. When reading any given record, one learns not only biographical details such as name, gender, age at the time of service, place and region of origin but also information about work assignments in Upper Swabia. This includes details about the start and end of service, the place of deployment with the corresponding municipality, the name of the employer, and the job title. Additionally, some information about the start and end of school exemption is included2.

However, all geospatial data on places of origin and work are only provided in text form, making analysis using Geographic Information Systems (GIS) impossible. Nevertheless, in order to illustrate the geographical distribution and cumulative frequency of these occurrences in certain regions, all locations were georeferenced. Using methodological insights from spatial history and history from below, the thesis presented the results of this analysis and critically contextualized them with the addition of existing source material and scholarly interpretations. Furthermore, through economic, demographic, and topographic insights, the push and pull factors of the geographical distribution that led to these migration movements were revealed. It also sheds light on how the children even managed to travel from their places of origin to their places of service. From these findings emerged a social topography that captured the Swabian child labor system at a systemic level.

[^fn1]: [o.A.]: Ein Kinderhandel, in: Die Gartenlaube 4 (1866), S. 55. https://de.wikisource.org/wiki/Ein_Kinderhandel. ↩ ↩2

[^fn2]: Bauernhaus-Museum Wolfegg (Ed.): The Swabian Children Database, online: Schwabenkinder.eu, https://www.schwabenkinder.eu/de/Datenbank/datenbank-suche/ [22.11.2023]. ↩
